`@plone/registry` as ESM module, move to TS, complete documentation (#6399)
plone/volto: packages/registry/README.md

Sometimes you need to build something generic that is pluggable and extensible.
In the JavaScript and TypeScript ecosystem, this is often quite complex, and the existing frameworks do not provide the means to do this.

> `@plone/registry` provides tools for providing plug-ability to your app:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`@plone/registry` provides tools to facilitate pluggability for your app through the following registries:
```

```

The `addons` key ensures the add-on's main default export function is executed, being passed the configuration registry.
In that function, the add-on can customize the configuration registry.
The function needs to return the `config` object (the configuration registry), so that it's passed further along to the other add-ons.

The add-ons are registered in the order they are found in the `addons` key.
The last add-on takes precedence over the others.
This means that if you configure something in `acme-volto-foo-addon`, then the same thing later in `collective-another-volto-addon`, the latter configured thing will win and its configuration will be applied.

> The default export of any add-on `main` entry module in `package.json` (eg. `src/index.js`) file should be a function with the signature `config => config`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default export of any add-on `main` entry module in `package.json` (for example, `src/index.js`) file should be a function with the signature `config => config`.
```

```

The `addons` key ensures the add-on's main default export function is executed, being passed the configuration registry.
In that function, the add-on can customize the configuration registry.
The function needs to return the `config` object (the configuration registry), so that it's passed further along to the other add-ons.

The add-ons are registered in the order they are found in the `addons` key.
The last add-on takes precedence over the others.
This means that if you configure something in `acme-volto-foo-addon`, then the same thing later in `collective-another-volto-addon`, the latter configured thing will win and its configuration will be applied.

> The default export of any add-on `main` entry module in `package.json` (for example, `src/index.js`) file should be a function with the signature `config => config`.

Author: @stevepiercy trying to give some context, we can remove the parenthesis. How about:

```suggestion
All add-ons should have set the `main` entry module in `package.json`, for example {file}`src/index.js`.
This function should have a signature of `config => config`.
```

Once the app starts, the add-on registry will execute, in order, all the registered add-ons' default export functions, configuring the new block.
The add-on will then become available to the CMS when it asks the configuration registry for it.

### Initialization

> **TODO**

Author: @stevepiercy @davisagli Since we will have a separated docs, I would simplify things from the README, what do you think?

> **TODO**

Reviewer: YES! Purge anything from the README that exists in the docs, and provide a link to the separate docs. For now, use the RTD site.

In the future, if we include these docs in the main Plone Documentation, we can update this link.

I also think that we need something in the Volto docs that refers to these docs, but I'm not sure where. What would make sense?

## Component registry

The configuration registry can also store special elements that can be queried and retrieved in a pluggable way.
The configuration registry also stores a components registry in itself.
The components registry is a mapping of name to component.
You can look up a name, and receive a component that you can reference in your code.

> This provides an alternative, and more convenient, way to customize components, in a pluggable way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This provides an alternative, and more convenient, way to customize components in a pluggable way.
```

```jsx
<Component componentName="Toolbar" dependencies={[props.content['@type']]} {...props} />
```

### Lazy load components
**TODO** Test it properly

You could lazy load the component too in the registry, if you need it.

```js
const MyTeaserDefaultComponent = lazy(()=> import(./MyTeaserDefaultComponent))

config.registerComponent({
    name: 'Teaser',
    component: MyTeaserDefaultComponent,
  });
```

## Utilities registry

The configuration registry also stores a utilities registry in itself.
The components registry is a mapping of a `name` and a `type` to a method or function.
It works in a similar way as the components registry, but for methods and functions and by adding an additional query argument `type`.

### Register utilities using `config.registerUtility`

> You register an utility using a specific `name` and `type` arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can register a utility using specific `name` and `type` arguments.
```

```js
config.registerUtility({
  name: 'url',
  type: 'validator',
  method: () => 'this is a simple validator utility',
});
```

For a same `type` you can register different `name` utilities.

```js
config.registerUtility({
  name: 'url',
  type: 'validator',
  method: () => 'this is a simple validator utility',
});

config.registerUtility({
  name: 'email',
  type: 'validator',
  method: () => 'this is a simple validator utility',
});
```

> However, registering two utilities under the same `name`, the latter will override the former.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, if you register two utilities under the same `name`, then the latter will override the former.
```

> So you can override existing utilities in your add-ons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus you can override existing utilities in your add-ons.
```

```js
config.registerUtility({
  name: 'url',
  type: 'validator',
  method: () => 'this is a simple url validator utility',
});

config.registerUtility({
  name: 'url',
  type: 'validator',
  method: () => 'this registered url validator utility will prevail, as defined later',
});
```

### Register utilities using a `dependencies` object

It is possible to register utilities using a `dependencies` object.

> This is useful in order to narrow even more the specificity of the utility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is useful to further specify the utility.
```

```js
config.registerUtility({
  name: 'email',
  type: 'validator',
  dependencies: { fieldType: 'email' },
  method: () => 'this is a validator utility with dependencies for email',
});
```

> ### Retrieve an utility from the utilities registry

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Retrieve a utility from the utilities registry
```

You can retrieve one specific utility using `config.getUtility`, given the `name` and `type`.

```js
config.getUtility({ name: 'url', type: 'validator' }).method(),
```

> or using a `dependencies` object:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can do the same using a `dependencies` object:
```

```js
config.getUtility({
  name: 'email',
  dependencies: { fieldType: 'string' },
  type: 'validator',
}).method(),
```

> ### Retrieve all the utilities of the same `type`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Retrieve all utilities of the same `type`
```

> You can also retrieve all the utilities registered under the same `type`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can retrieve all utilities registered under the same `type`.
```

```js
config.getUtilities({ type: 'validator' })
```

> or given a `dependencies` object:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can do the same using a `dependencies` object:
```

```jsx
<Component componentName="Toolbar" dependencies={[props.content['@type']]} {...props} />
```

### Lazy load components

> **TODO** Test it properly

Author: Same as above

You could lazy load the component too in the registry, if you need it.

```js
const MyTeaserDefaultComponent = lazy(()=> import(./MyTeaserDefaultComponent))

config.registerComponent({
    name: 'Teaser',
    component: MyTeaserDefaultComponent,
  });
```

## Utilities registry

The configuration registry also stores a utilities registry in itself.
The components registry is a mapping of a `name` and a `type` to a method or function.

> It works in a similar way as the components registry, but for methods and functions and by adding an additional query argument `type`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It works in a similar way as the components registry, but for methods and functions, and by adding an additional query argument `type`.
```

> ### Register utilities using `config.registerUtility`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Register utilities
```

> You can register a utility using specific `name` and `type` arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can register a utility using `config.registerUtility` with specific `name` and `type` arguments.
```

This is useful to further specify the utility.

```js
config.registerUtility({
  name: 'email',
  type: 'validator',
  dependencies: { fieldType: 'email' },
  method: () => 'this is a validator utility with dependencies for email',
});
```

### Retrieve a utility from the utilities registry

You can retrieve one specific utility using `config.getUtility`, given the `name` and `type`.

```js
config.getUtility({ name: 'url', type: 'validator' }).method(),
```

You can do the same using a `dependencies` object:

```js
config.getUtility({
  name: 'email',
  dependencies: { fieldType: 'string' },
  type: 'validator',
}).method(),
```

### Retrieve all utilities of the same `type`

You can retrieve all utilities registered under the same `type`.

```js
config.getUtilities({ type: 'validator' })
```

You can do the same using a `dependencies` object:

```js
config.getUtilities({
  type: 'validator',
  dependencies: { fieldType: 'string' },
}).length,
```

This is useful when building pluggable systems, so you can query all the utilities present in the registry.
For example, retrieve all validator utilities for the `fieldType` `string`.

###

## Shadow components registry

> **TODO**

Author: Same as above
